The Project Gutenberg EBook of Revolt in the Ice Kingdom, by Ray Cummings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Revolt in the Ice Kingdom

Author: Ray Cummings

Release Date: April 12, 2020 [EBook #61810]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVOLT IN THE ICE KINGDOM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       REVOLT IN THE ICE EMPIRE

                            By RAY CUMMINGS

            Frozen little Zura was a stellar Utopia, until
          the Earthmen came to topple the rule of its gentle
              queen with the cankerous weapons of revolt.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Planet Stories Fall 1940.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


So much has been written into the permanent chronologies of science
concerning our pioneer voyage to the little asteroid of Zura--facts
and figures and sociological deductions, most of which are, of
actuality, erroneous--that even now after these many years, I feel
constrained to set down, as simply as I can, exactly what occurred.
All my life I have shunned publicity; my wife has shunned it. Zura,
weird little wandering world, has never returned. Why, after coming
in from the realms of outer space at least twice and rounding our Sun
upon an elliptic orbit, it should now have failed to reappear--I will
leave that to the astronomers to imagine. But no one from Earth, quite
obviously, will ever go to Zura again. Tara and I, so to speak, are
sole survivors.

So at least I think I am qualified to tell what happened; to correct
the Official Chronolograph in its implications that Zura was a model
little world, from which our Earth might learn much. As my grandfather
might have quoted his grandfather saying, that is the bunk. When you
put humans on a planet, you will get love--but also hate; honesty, but
dishonesty; peace, but also war. The weird people of Zura were weird
to us only because their environment had made them outwardly different
from us. Like us they were human--and there could never have been
Utopia evolved from them.

I am no philosopher, but at least I must have my say on this. Tara was
misguided. She admits it now. Indeed, at heart she is more opposed than
most of you who read this, to those crusaders here on earth who talk
of revolutions and bloodshed so that some new Social Order may evolve
and bring the world Utopia. The ideals are often sound, but always
impossible of fulfillment. And those who sponsor them usually are
intelligent enough to know it, advancing themselves upon the pitiful
hopes of the ignorant, who think they are being led upward when in
reality they are often worse off than before.

Do I seem prefacing some weighty analysis of mankind's frailties? That
is wrong. I am prefacing what might better be called a love story. I
am an old man now, but it colors my memory still with a warm glow like
a sunrise spreading glorious colors on the drabness of a twilight sky.
That, to my young life, was the coming of Tara....

I was just twenty, that spring morning of 1990 when Dr. Robert
Livingston's message came to me.

    "Strange good news, John. I have picked our destination, but it
    must be secret. Fly up and see me tonight."

Strange good news! There was a note of suppressed excitement in those
three words which somehow communicated to me so that as I flew my
little car up to the Maine woods that evening I was tensed to hear what
it could be. My name is John Taine, as naturally you must have realized
from my preface. There is nothing of me that can be of interest to this
narrative previous to that spring morning of 1990. I quite imagine I
was a drab enough sort of young fellow. Certainly my work as mechanic
in the building of stratosphere ships had brought me little money and
no claim to achievement.

But Dr. Livingston liked me; for a year now I had been working for
him, building to his specifications that primitive little space
ship with which he hoped to pioneer on an exploratory flight to
some other world. Livingston was an inventor and scientist of very
great genius. But unfortunately, being a dreamer, a gentle fellow
and trusting--completely no businessman--he had gone through life
impoverished.

We had been much pinched for funds in our work. Our little flyer indeed
was now not finished, and I was on an enforced vacation, with our funds
exhausted, waiting until Dr. Livingston might find some sponsor to
refinance us. Strange good news? Assuredly I was hoping that he would
have a few decimars in hand now--or even a few thousand gold dollars
with which we might continue the work.

       *       *       *       *       *

His pleasure and excitement were obvious when he greeted me in the
laboratory of his isolated little Maine home, upon my arrival just
after dusk that evening.

"Good news, John. It certainly is. I couldn't tell you before what I've
been trying to do here while work on the _Planeteer_ had to stop. But
I've accomplished my purpose."

"Money--" I said.

"Money, yes. Oh, yes, indeed, John. And fame. The accomplishment of
our desire--to make a flight into Interplanetary space, and come back
again. We've got it all within our reach now. Sit down, John--I'll tell
you what I've done."

I had never seen Dr. Livingston so excited. He was a small man, forty
perhaps, though he looked somewhat older with his thin face and his
shaggy, longish iron-gray hair. He had no family; he lived here alone,
with only one deaf old woman for his housekeeper. We were in his
chemical laboratory now--a littered room on the ground floor of his
home, which was a few miles out in the country from a small town of the
Maine coast. We were building the _Planeteer_ here, in a big impromptu
frame hangar which was set on the wooded hilltop a hundred yards or so
from the house.

But work on the _Planeteer_ had ceased. Our two assistants who had been
engaged with me now, like myself, were laid off. There was no one here
tonight save Livingston and me and the old woman who now had gone to
her room upstairs.

"We've got to be absolutely secret," Livingston said. He lowered his
voice and flung a glance at the window oval where the moonlight was
gleaming with a silver sheen. "There's big money involved in this. I'm
going to trust you, John, but no one else."

"What is it?" I murmured.

A little half-smile of excited triumph was playing about his thin lips.
"Let me ask you," he said, "have you ever heard of Xalite?"

"Well--just vaguely."

"The new element which was discovered a few years ago. I needn't
explain its technical uses--"

"A germ-killer," I said. "I remember hearing a technological
newscast--you bombard diseased tissues--"

"Exactly. To kill certain virulent germs without injuring the living
human tissue. And they're thinking now they could use it in the new
atomic engines--perhaps the one thing which would make them really
commercially practical--"

"Except that Xalite costs about ten thousand gold-dollars a grain," I
observed.

"Quite so. As a matter of fact, what little was discovered here on
earth is now in use. No more can be found--and it's an unstable
element. Within another year we will have no Xalite." He paused, and
then abruptly he added, still more softly,

"I've discovered an unlimited quantity, John. Xalite in quantity beyond
anyone's wildest dreams--"

"Where?" I gasped.

"Not here on earth. Don't you see how it fits with our plans for the
_Planeteer_?"

I sat silent, tense as he told me. There was, this year, coming in from
the realms of Interplanetary space, a little asteroid. Astronomers for
their charts had named it Zura--a dark, cold little world of perhaps
five hundred miles diameter.

"It seems this is its second visit," he said. "Some sixteen years ago
it first made its appearance--came into our Solar System, rounded the
Sun and went out again. The elements of its orbit, sixteen years ago,
were computed. A narrow ellipse, taking it in between Mercury and
Vulcan, and out beyond Pluto."

       *       *       *       *       *

In his laboratory here, Dr. Livingston had erected a small, but
ultra-modern, electroscope. He took me to it now. The dark little Zura,
he told me, already had cut the orbit of Mars and was fairly close to
us. It was in the northern sky now, near the zenith. The night was
clear, glittering with a myriad stars like gems profusely strewn on the
deep purple velvet of the Heavens. I gazed at little Zura as he swung
the high-powered little instrument almost to its full intensity of
magnification. What I saw was a round, blurred, dark-gray disc, dimly
mottled with heavy cloudbanks.

"What has this to do with us, and Xalite?" I murmured.

"I'll show you, John. If we can get a break in those clouds--it
sometimes occurs--"

We waited perhaps an hour, with the spectroscope attached so that the
vague reflected light from Zura was spread before us in its prismatic
colors. And then, momentarily, a break in the swirling, turgid
atmosphere of the dark little world, let us through to its bleak,
blurred, dark surface. Light was coming from there; light inherent to
the little world. On the spectroscope band I saw a new dark line.

"Xalite!" Livingston murmured. "You see it? Unmistakable. Deposits of
Xalite exist there. Xalite in quantities which to us and our needs will
be enormous. So that's the destination of our exploratory flight in
the _Planeteer_! It's not a question of money with us now, John. The
Anglo-American Medical Research Society--and the U. S. Government Dept.
of Power--have financed us for all we need."

I could only gaze at him with excitement thrilling me, matching
his own. All our money troubles ended. And a double purpose to our
adventure now. The conquest of Interplanetary flight; and the giving to
the world an element it so greatly needed.

Little Dr. Livingston was bending over me, gripping me. "You realize
the need of secrecy?" he murmured. "You and I, if we get this Xalite,
it will make us independently rich, of course. Enough for our life's
needs. But beyond that, the world will have it. Xalite, to be cheap as
old-fashioned petroleum." His voice had risen with his excitement, but
suddenly he lowered it again.

"But John, suppose we were unscrupulous. To keep the price of Xalite
up--to deal it out, only to the rich--to make ourselves fabulously
wealthy at the expense of the poor--"

"I see," I agreed. I wonder why my glance, like his, strayed idly to
our moonlit window oval, here on the ground floor of his home? I am not
the least bit psychic; there is, of course, no such thing anyway.

"We'll finish up the _Planeteer_ now," Livingston was saying. "Pete
Duroh and Carruthers--that's all you'll need. And as we agreed,
we'll take them with us. Four of us--that's enough to man the little
_Planeteer_. But nothing must be said of Xalite. You understand?"

"Yes, of course."

"So far as the world will know, the _Planeteer_ is starting merely on a
trial flight into Space. We don't want any publicity anyway. And Duroh
and Carruthers--they must know only that we're hoping we might reach
this wandering little asteroid. Nothing about Xalite. That can come
later. We don't want to take the least chance of this thing leaking
out--"

He checked himself suddenly. We both heard it--the sound of what seemed
padding footsteps, retreating from our laboratory doorway. Someone
furtively slinking away in the house corridor.

"Why--good Lord--!" I gasped.

I dashed into the dim corridor. There was nothing; and then I heard a
distant outer door close. The intruder had escaped from the house. And
then, from the laboratory, came Dr. Livingston's gasp: "John, look--"

I swung back to him. In the moonlight at the laboratory window a face
showed behind the filmy curtains--a man's face peering in at us. It was
just an instant glimpse.... Staring, wild, red-rimmed eyes--the face
wearing a bluish stubble of beard. By no chance could it have been the
person who had escaped me in the corridor.

In that second, I dashed for the window. The face had gone. I got there
only in time to see a dark blob scurrying away into the shadows of the
moonlit woods.


                                  II

"All ready, Dr. Livingston," I said.

"Eh? Oh, yes. Well, that's fine, John. We'll start at once."

"I checked the ventilators," Duroh said.

The big, beetle-browed Peter Duroh--dark-haired, handsome young giant
who had been working for us nearly a year--stood beside me. It was the
great night--our time of departure at last had arrived, with the little
_Planeteer_ glistening and ready.

To you who read this, familiar now with the great finned cylinders
which the last half century has produced on earth for the conquest of
Interplanetary space, our little space-ship was inadequate and queer
indeed. Unlike modern vessels, Dr. Livingston had built the _Planeteer_
in the shape of a huge bell-like globe. Huge, to us then. But its
maximum equatorial diameter was a scant fifty feet.

Strange little ship indeed. Its interior was of three stories--the
largest--the middle one--our several rooms of living quarters, ample
enough for four of us. Below that, in the base, were the mechanism
rooms. And the top level, fairly near the apex, was in effect a mere
circular turret, with a glassite dome over it completing that segment
of the outer shell.

It is not my purpose here to describe Dr. Livingston's pioneer
mechanisms. All that is technological history in the chronicles of the
development of space-navigation. But I do wish to point out that Dr.
Livingston, in his essentials of mechanism, has not been improved upon
even in this last half century. The _Planeteer_ was double-shelled,
the six-inch space between the reinforced walls containing the swiftly
vibrating, oscillating electronic current now known as the Erentz
principle--the absorption of the outer pressure, translated by the
swiftly flying electrons of the current into harmless kinetic energy.
And we had, in segments, throughout the globe-shaped walls, gravity
plates for the neutralization of gravity; its intensification; and the
negative force of repulsion.

We had air-renewers--antiquated now, I admit--but still very
serviceable to us; and ventilating and temperature systems. We had no
electronic rocket-streams for atmospheric flight; that, as you all
know, came much later.

It was, by earth-time, just midnight when we were ready to start. Dr.
Livingston was excited, confused now that the time was at hand. But the
other three of us, outwardly at least, were calm enough, eager only to
be sure every preparation was in order.

There was no public celebration. Like Livingston, I had no close
family, so that only a few of the family and friends of Peter Duroh
and James Carruthers, our other assistant, were here on this momentous
night in the little board hangar to see us off.

"Tell him to come in," Dr. Livingston was saying. "I want to start on
the midnight hour."

The big, dark-haired young Duroh went to the incline that led down from
the upper control turret room where we were now standing and shouted to
Carruthers, who was still down, bidding good-bye to the visitors on the
hangar floor.

"All right," he shouted up to us. "I'm coming." He came in a moment. He
was Livingston's most competent technician, this James Carruthers. Like
young Duroh, he had been with us almost from the start of the building
of the _Planeteer_. He was an older man, rather a small, tight-lipped,
sandy-haired fellow. Grim of aspect, usually silent, listening with
alert, keen gray eyes.

"All ready," he said.

"Yes, bolt the door," Dr. Livingston agreed.

We waved our last farewells to the silent, awed little group of men and
women down in the hangar, and I swung the big glassite bull's-eye door
closed, bolted it and admitted the Erentz current into it.

Departure from earth.... There was no one who could have seen that
pioneer departure, much less be on it, without a surging thrill and
a trembling. Certainly I felt it. Excitement--and fear. There is no
one who can face the unknown without a little shudder, no matter how
adventurous and reckless he may be. I recall that we four, in the dimly
starlit little turret--starlight which came down through the open
roof of the hangar and through our glassite dome--stood grim, silent
and awed. Then Dr. Livingston flung the current into the base gravity
plates set for the repelling negation.

The _Planeteer_ trembled just a little; and then slowly, silently was
rising....

       *       *       *       *       *

Departure from earth.... And we were just the second party of all
earth people in history who had ever seriously tried it. The first,
as you all recall, had been sixteen years before. The ill-fated Blake
expedition--six men, one of them the strange, humanity-hating George
Simpson, joining the explorers at the last moment, declaiming publicly
that he wanted to leave the earth forever! Vowing that if Blake landed
anywhere in the Universe, he, George Simpson, would remain there in
preference to coming back to earth!

Well, the fanatic Simpson certainly had had his way in that! The Blake
ship--even more antiquated than our _Planeteer_--safely left earth's
atmosphere and plunged away. And never was heard of again!

Dr. Livingston's clutch on my arm and his excited murmured words jerked
me out of my roving awed thoughts. "We're starting, boy--good luck to
us--"

I could only nod and try to smile as I swallowed the lump in my throat.
Leaving earth. There was a jumbled prayer then in my mind and heart
that the great Creator would take care of us and give us luck....

The little group of people down on the hangar floor were waving now,
queerly foreshortened as in a second they dropped away. Then we were up
in the starlight; mounting with the bleak Maine coast and its string
of lights shrinking beneath us.... Swift acceleration. Soon we were
in the stratosphere; and then in a great curving crescent--product of
our repulsion and the tangental force of the earth's rotation--we were
hurled off into space....

"Well, we did it, John--we did, didn't we?" Dr. Livingston said.
"Now--do you want some rest? Go on down if you like." He was seated
in his shirtsleeves by his little instrument table, with its humming
bank of dials and levels. He mopped his dripping forehead with his
handkerchief. It was hot as the shades of hell now in the _Planeteer's_
interior--the friction of our rapid rise through the atmosphere, with
which our temperature-controls were unable to cope. But we knew it
would cool off quick enough presently.

"I'll stay here with you a while," I said. "I can't get used to it
yet--wonderful, sort of frightening, isn't it?"

"And beautiful, John. Profitable, too--with the Xalite we'll bring
back--turn it over to the authorities. And then, with our money,
build another ship. A larger one. I'm going to devote my life to the
development of space-travel. Why, John, can't you envisage--a big
vessel, with passengers, bringing people from Mars maybe, if it's
inhabited--"

Poor Dr. Livingston. His life was destined to be cut so short! How wise
of the Creator that he so seldom gives us any hint of what is to come,
so that at least we may dream....

We had said nothing to Duroh and Carruthers about the Xalite, fearing
that they might be tempted to tell others, family and friends, and
before our departure the secret would be out. When we reached Zura,
it was our plan to tell them, of course. And from the beginning Dr.
Livingston had always insisted that he would see they shared equally
with him and me.

My mind went back now to that night when he had first told me our
plans; that weird face at our window, and someone who simultaneously
had seemed to be eavesdropping upon us from the corridor. We had been
apprehensive--if our secret was known--that something might occur to
stop our departure, that some other expedition might hurriedly be made
ready to try and get to Zura. But so far as we could know, nothing of
the kind had happened.

"You see, John, with what we know now of space-flying," Dr. Livingston
was saying, "the whole realm of the Solar System will be open to us in
another twenty or thirty years. Why, with real money at our command,
you and I--"

A shout from the living compartments under us checked him. Then there
was the sound of a scuffle, and big Peter Duroh's roar:

"Why, damn you, come out of there! Grab him, Jim!"

And Carruthers' grim, quiet voice: "I've got him--"

They came clattering up into the starlit turret, dragging a man between
them. Numbly Dr. Livingston and I stared. The face we had seen that
night, peering at us through the laboratory window--wild-eyed, pallid,
with a stubble of beard! We saw now that it was a thin, youthful face,
with rumpled curly black hair above it. A boy, certainly no more than
sixteen or seventeen. He was clad in tattered, dirty clothes, his whole
appearance unkempt, his figure thin, almost emaciated as though he had
been long without adequate nourishment. He cowered between Duroh and
Carruthers, shaking with terror.

"Don't--don't kill me," he gasped. "I'll do what you want--I'll help on
the trip. I just want something to eat and drink--"

"Cast him loose," I said. I swung on him. "Who in the devil are you--"

"Alan Grant," he gasped. "Oh, I guess you've heard of me, all right."
He stood wild-eyed, trembling as Carruthers and Duroh let go of him.
"Where are we? We've left the earth, haven't we? Well, that's all
right--but don't you take me back. I'm not going to let anybody take me
back--"

Alan Grant. We knew him then. For months televised images of the lad
had been flung around the world. A wanted man--wanted for multiple
murder--with a price of a decimar on his head for anyone who would take
him, dead or alive!


                                  III

"You think we should approach from this side, John?" Dr. Livingston
said.

I shrugged. "How can you tell?"

"True enough. If only those damnable clouds would act decently and
open up now."

Dr. Livingston and I were seated in the turret, bathed in the brilliant
sunlight. Zura at which we were rushing broadside, so to speak, was
now, even to the naked eye, a huge full-round disc, with the sunlight
gleaming turgid in its sullen, swirling cloud-masses of atmosphere.
By a queer mischance, we had had no break in the Zurian clouds since
leaving earth. At which side had we best approach? Our only purpose was
to land near some deposit of the Xalite.

But there was so much that we did not know. Were deposits of the
precious metal widespread over the little asteroid? Would it be found
only in a gaseous state, perhaps, so that we could not secure it? This
atmosphere--would we be able to breathe it; or would our air-masks be
necessary?

So much that we did not know, but there were many things about the
strange little world which already we had learned. Apparently it was of
a very great density. Dr. Livingston had calculated that back on earth.
Its gravity, despite its five hundred-mile diameter, was, he thought,
perhaps not much less than that of earth. And we knew now that it was
not presenting one side always to the sun, but was rotating on its
axis. A swift procession of days and nights, each some three or four
hours long.

It is far from my purpose to detail the trip of the _Planeteer_
from earth to Zura. All that has been written many times--with
embellishments--and space-flying today has lost its novelty. Ours was
a swift, uneventful passage, save that to us it was awe-inspiring
indeed. Alan Grant, the young outlaw-killer who had so unexpectedly
thrust himself upon us, had been a problem. His own case has now become
history; I need not detail that either, except to say that by my
experience with him, one may be a murderer and still inspire pity.

It is really horrible how quickly one may plunge downward in life.
Alan Grant was only a boy really. Jealous over a worthless woman, and
befuddled by alcoholite, in ten minutes he had changed himself from a
decent, self-respecting lad into a bloodstained, multiple killer. All
in ten minutes--with all the rest of his life to pay the penalty.

To Dr. Livingston he was a problem. There were none of us willing to
turn back to earth--even there at the start--just to deliver him to
the authorities. It may have been his pleading; and Dr. Livingston's
gentle, kindly nature. What would ultimately have been his fate,
back on earth, was something which, as events transpired, never had
to be decided. Certainly on the trip up to now, he had caused us no
trouble--an intelligent lad, seemingly eager to do his share of work.
We had told Carruthers and Duroh now about the Xalite. And Alan had
heard it also. His thin, boyish face had had a queer look, or at least
it seemed so to me.

The contamination of criminality! The thought had leaped into my mind,
though Heaven knows I said nothing. One crime so easily to lead to
another. But I flung away the thought. With a human excuse, Alan had
stained himself with blood. Somehow, knowing him through those days and
nights of that awing trip, I did not think he would want to repeat the
experience.

"You'll stay on watch?" Dr. Livingston said, now as we sat together in
the turret. "I'm tired, John. If those clouds break, call me at once."

"Yes," I agreed.

He went down to his room. Duroh and Carruthers were sleeping; and Alan
also. I was left alone in the turret. I drew the curtains to shroud the
sunlight. Bathed in starlight from the other side, I sat staring out
at Zura. Wild, sullen-looking little world. The sunlight shot into its
gray-black clouds with turgid orange and green light. We were so close
now that the huge cloudy ball was spread over much of the firmament,
with the white gleaming stars prismatic in the black abyss of space
around it. And with our still-rapid approach, the disc was almost
visibly enlarging.

A step sounded behind me, I looked up. "Oh, you, Alan?"

"Can I sit with you?"

"Yes, sure."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was a different-looking lad now. We had given him clean clothes;
he was cleanly shaved; his face and his body, though still thin, had
filled out a bit. A handsome, sensitive-looking young fellow. But in
his eyes was the same hunted look.

"That's Zura," he said. "Looks quite a bit bigger now, doesn't
it?" Then suddenly he swung on me. "I'm going to stay there,
John--understand? You can't stop me--not any of you--because I won't go
back."

Pathetic damn words to come from a boy--to give up his world, his
people, everything to which he was born, because he had made himself,
all in ten minutes, unfitted for everything.

"Zura may not be habitable," I said. "No food. Maybe you can't even
breathe that air down there. We don't know."

"I don't care. I'm not going back to earth." And then he added, "I--I
guess I'd rather be there even without food." He muttered it with a
grim bitterness. "The only man in my world--I couldn't do anything
wrong then, could I?"

For an hour after that I think we both sat almost in silence. I was
busy with the electro-telescope, trying to see down into the swirling
Zurian clouds. On the stool beside me, Alan Grant just sat brooding.
And then suddenly, as though he had been struggling all this time to
reach some momentous decision, he burst out:

"I've got to tell you, that's all. John, listen--"

I was absorbed with the telescope so that I hardly heeded him.
It seemed that the clouds of Zura, in one place in the northern
hemisphere, were breaking into a little rift. At Alan's words, I saw
out of the tail of my eye that he had flung an apprehensive look at
the little spiral staircase of alumite which wound down into the lower
levels of the _Planeteer_.

"What?" I said idly.

He lowered his voice. "I can't help telling you. I don't want--again--"

What a fatuous fool I was at that moment! Queer how in life, things
momentous may of actuality hang upon seeming trivialities! If only I
had listened to Alan Grant then! But in that instant, as I peered into
the eyepiece of the telescope, a rift in the clouds of Zura opened up.
I must have muttered some exclamation.

"What is it?" Alan demanded.

"The clouds are breaking! We may be able to see the surface now. Wait,
I'll swing it onto the image screen, so we can both see it."

I made the connections. The little flurescent screen glowed with an
image of the atmosphere of Zura--turgid, green, yellow and black masses
of clouds, whirled and tossed by giant storms.

"Good Lord!" Alan exclaimed. "Are we supposed to descend through that?"

"No. We'd have to have a rift. There's one coming there now."

Midway between the equator and the pole there was a widening opening.
Then a segment of the dark surface was visible. I focused the
electro-telescope, swung its controls to a smaller area with a greater
magnification. The surface of Zura! What a weird, wild scene! The image
gave us perhaps a square mile. There was a turgid twilight down there,
through which the daylight now was slanting, broken by the haze which
still remained in this clearer atmosphere.

The terrain was rocky--a bleak, desolate waste, barren and empty.
Tumbled rocks, buttes and spires, all slate-gray, sleek and glistening
like marble. A tumbled terrain, with fissures and cave-mouths
everywhere; rifts, gullies and huge canyons. Was it rock, or metal?
Extremely dense--it had that obvious aspect; a compressed little world,
with its surface broken, mangled as though by some titanic cataclysm.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a frigid little world. White patches of snow and sleek blue ice
everywhere were apparent. But it was melting ice now. Weirdly in places
it drooped, grotesquely leprous where it had melted away. And in the
hollows, there was water. Off to one side, a big bowl-like depression
was a lake of water, scattered with melting ice. Frigid world, but now
approaching the sun, warmth was striking down, melting the congealed
surface. Masses of ice turning rotten. As I stared, a great frozen mass
which hung like a white veil over a hundred-foot cliff abruptly broke
away. Sunlight chanced to strike it as it came splintering down, so
that it looked like fractured spun glass, a riot of prismatic color.

"John! Look! There, down at the lower corner!" Alan was tensely
pointing to a corner of the image screen. What was this? I stared and
caught my breath. It seemed that against a distant ice-spire which
stood like a stalagmite on the weird melting landscape, a white figure
was poised. It seemed to move a little.

"Someone alive down there!" Alan murmured. "Look--that figure moved!"

Zura inhabited! We had never given a thought to that, save to assume
that it was not. My fingers were shaking as I fumbled at the telescope,
shortening the focus still further, giving a greater magnification
of a much smaller area. Our fluroscope screen blurred; then slowly
clarified, with an area of only a hundred feet or so.

Numbed, we stared at a white figure which was against the ice-spire. A
girl! A human girl? Heaven knows, it seemed so. Pale white in the weird
Zurian daylight, she stood motionless, seemingly gazing out over the
melting landscape. A girl the size of a girl on earth. A white garment,
white fur perhaps, draped her breasts and thighs. Her long hair, white
as a veil of frozen falling water, was tumbled over her shoulders.

Woman carved in white marble. Woman molded of sleek ice. If we had not
seen her move, she could have been a strange statue of a beautiful
earthgirl, frozen there. Then suddenly as the swirling clouds shifted,
a shaft of sunlight fell upon her. There was a pink-whiteness, like a
delicate flush, on her limbs, neck and face.

For that second Alan and I breathlessly stared. And then, as though the
sunlight were something horribly frightening, her little body seemed to
shudder. She turned, plunged into the shadows of a rock-rift and was
gone!


                                  IV

Within another day, we were close over it. Of necessity our velocity
was much less now. We had tilted so that the asteroid was under
us, with our base gravity plates in negation. Zura for twenty-four
earth-hours had been repulsing us, retarding us, as we dropped upon it.
Dr. Livingston had made careful calculations. The total mass of Zura,
small as the asteroid was in size, he had figured to be nearly that of
the earth. We confirmed it now, by the repulsing effect it had upon us.

Gradually we slowed, poised now midway in the northern hemisphere,
Zura had a rotation on its axis of almost exactly four hours. That we
had been able to check now--there had been six rotations in the span
of an earth-day, as measured by our chronometer. A thousand miles up?
It seemed now that we were no more than that. The Benson curve-rays,
here in the turret, showed us on our tilted mirrors the full image of
the little world directly under us. Its convexity long since had been
apparent. It spread now like a huge cloud-enveloped ball, covering
almost all the lower firmament.

"The clouds are lessening," Dr. Livingston said, as again he and I were
alone in the turret. "We'll be able to descend easily through this
atmosphere."

"Yes," I agreed.

There had been faint, though unmistakable, evidences of Xalite in many
places. We had decided that our best course was to descend before the
storms came back. Most of the moisture-masses seemed clustered over
the southern hemisphere now. Here in the north, for six Zurian days
it had been fairly clear. Swift alternation of day and night--days
of gray, hazy light, with the sunlight often striking through. And
nights of glittering stars. We had seen all the surface of the northern
hemisphere now. Everywhere it was the same--bleak, metallic-looking
gray rocks, wildly tumbled; huge, fantastic ice and snow formations;
strewn pools of water, choked with melting ice.

Alan and I had mentioned that weird vision we had had of a living girl,
so strangely fashioned in human mold. Was she real--or had our fancy
tricked us? Dr. Livingston had blankly stared. From the big, handsome
Peter Duroh had come a laugh and a ribald expression of hope that we
were right. James Carruthers had merely stared incredulously, with his
thin lips smiling and a look in his alert eyes that somehow seemed
predatory.

But whether we had seen something animal or human, assuredly it had
been alive. This atmosphere then, doubtless would be breatheable to us;
and the temperature down there, by daylight at least, must be around
40F.

Dr. Livingston was checking his instruments. Another hour had passed.
"Only five hundred miles of altitude now," he said. "I think we may use
a little less repulsion for a time, and then the final retardation must
begin."

Awesome descent. It took us another eighteen earth-hours while the
weird convex surface of little Zura came up at us. I was often in the
turret alone. Queerly an ominous sense of disaster was upon me. I could
not tell why. Fear that we might not land safely? Surely it was not
that. Rather was it as though, here in the little _Planeteer_ which had
been our world, something was impending. Somehow I had grown to dislike
Pete Duroh and Jim Carruthers. Just little things. That ribald laugh.
A way they had seemingly of watching me, whispering together while I
was at the spectroscope, checking what evidence I could find of the
presence of Xalite on the asteroid's surface.

And young Grant, boyish multiple murderer, whom now I had come somehow
to like--what was it that he had wanted to tell me? I had tried several
times to see him alone to ask him; but obviously he was avoiding me
now. Whatever it was, he had repented the impulse.

We were all five in the turret during the descent through the Zurian
atmosphere. Only fifty thousand feet up now. It was night, with
glittering stars above us, and below, that wild, tumbled, fantastic
landscape spreading now off to the horizon, bleak and grim in the
starlight....

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty thousand feet. Sudden daylight had come and then night again.
We were moving with Zura now in her swift axial rotation, dropping
almost vertically down, slowly now with a constant retardation. I did
not mention it, but I realized that we were poised very nearly over
where Alan and I had seen--or thought we had seen--that strange vision
of a girl. She had not reappeared. Were there others like her here? A
race of people so much like earth humans that one of them could be a
beautiful young girl, so like a girl of earth that I had resented the
ribald attitude of Carruthers and Duroh?

My thoughts seemed totally impossible, according to scientific logic.
Yet Alan and I surely had seen her....

"This damn heat," Duroh said. He sat slumped on the control room floor,
his lanky body in trousers and shirt. His black wavy hair was plastered
on his forehead with sweat. He mopped it with his big handkerchief.

"You'll get it cold enough pretty soon," Carruthers laughed. "Take your
time, Pete."

Carruthers was alertly watching Dr. Livingston as he shifted the
gravity plates for a still greater retardation. "Going to slow us some
more, Doc?"

"Yes. Yes, I don't want to take any chances."

Five thousand feet.... Then two thousand. Off to the right the great
cauldron depression was like a mile-wide lake--black water choked with
floating ice on which the starlight glistened prismatic. A great ramp
of the gray metallic rock went up like a glacier to the left. Beside
it, the foothills of distant mountains went up in great terraced tiers.
Everywhere there were ice-filled gullies, with water pouring down out
of many of them. Gullies, ravines and crevices; pits yawning with inky
blackness....

And then I noticed that, weirdly, there seemed light inherent to these
Zurian rock-masses. Some of the cave-mouths were not quite black--a
little light appeared in them, glowing with a prismatic sheen.

A thousand feet. I was at the gravity control-board now, executing Dr.
Livingston's swift murmured orders. Without our modern rocket-streams,
the little _Planeteer_, I must admit, was unwieldy. We were dropping
slowly, with a side drift. In a corner Alan sat staring at us, with his
hands gripped between his knees, his fingers working nervously. Duroh
and Carruthers were standing tense beside me.

It was a touchy few minutes. We were some two hundred feet above a
broken ice-strewn plateau, with a side drift that was carrying us
toward a small cliff. I could see where Dr. Livingston intended to land
now--a little shallow bowl-depression near the cliff, where the bottom
seemed flat, with soft snow. The _Planeteer_ was hovering upright, with
a very slow, vertical axis rotation, so that as I used the cliff's
repulsion to check our drift, I was shifting the current constantly in
our side gravity plates.

Queer how one may think of two things at once! I was seated at the
control table, with my fingers roving its gravity-plate shifting keys.
Dr. Livingston was tensely peering through the side bull's-eyes,
gauging our position, our downward and sidewise drift; calling out
to me his orders. Certainly my mind had never been more alertly on
anything than it now was on those gravity keys. But nevertheless,
suddenly I was aware of an electric feeling here in the control room.
Carruthers and Duroh exchanging glances. And over in the corner young
Alan, with his hands between his knees, his fingers writhing, his dark
gaze brooding on me.

"Base negation! Full--quickly now!" Dr. Livingston called.

We were almost over the snowy depression--hardly the height of the
_Planeteer_ above it. I flung on the base repulsion; held it only some
ten seconds. Then gave attraction for an instant.

That may have been the first landing of any space-ship in the history
of the Universe. I do not know, of course; but I will say we eased
the little _Planeteer_ down as light as a falling snowdrop. There was
hardly a bump as we landed, with the base flat in the melting snow, and
the globe of the _Planeteer_ almost exactly upright.

"Good enough, John. We did it!" Dr. Livingston was triumphant. He swung
toward me, his face flushed with pleasure. Jim Carruthers was close
beside him. "Good work, wasn't it, Jim?"

"Yes," Carruthers said, with his thin smile. "You did nicely,
Doctor." He was partly behind Dr. Livingston; I saw his arm raised
behind Livingston's back. I had no more warning than that. The knife
Carruthers was clutching stabbed deeply. I saw the smile fade off poor
Dr. Livingston's face, with a dazed look of wonderment spreading there
as he tossed up his arms and sprawled forward. He dropped in a crumpled
heap almost at my feet, with the alumite knife-handle sticking from his
back where a ghastly crimson stain already was spreading on his white
shirt.

"Why--why, good Lord--" I gasped. I was on my feet; mind blurred,
numbed with horror. My fists clenched as I whirled at Carruthers.
"Why--why, you damned--"

"Easy there!" It was Peter Duroh's growling voice behind me. I swung
to face him. His big lanky figure leaned nonchalantly against one of
the side bull's-eye windows. Both his hands were at his hips--his hands
gripping an old-fashioned bullet-projector and a Banning heat-gun, with
muzzles leveled at my chest!


                                   V

"So what are you going to do with me?" I demanded.

"Take it easy. Sit where you are." They had shoved me back into my
chair at the instrument board. Over in a corner Alan still sat with his
hands clasped between his knees, and his fingers working. Just a boy.
He could not meet the glance I flung at him.

"Is Dr. Livingston dead?" I said. "If he isn't--Good Lord, are you
going to let him just lie there?"

"Oh, he's dead all right," Duroh growled.

"You have no objection if I see, have you?"

"No. Go ahead."

"We'll go out by the lower door," Carruthers said impassively. "Keep
your muzzle on him, Pete--I'm going down. Livingston said we'll use a
portable spectroscope to locate the Xalite. It's in the base; I'll go
rig it up."

"You better not open that base door too quickly," I warned. "If this
atmosphere is wrong, in chemical content or pressure--kill us all here
like rats in a trap."

"Don't you worry, Taine." From the head of the little incline stairway
Carruthers grinned at me with his tight-lipped, ironic smile. "That's
why you're alive. We realize you know more about a lot of things in
this than we do."

Damnable cold-blooded villain. He waved his hand with jaunty irony at
me as he vanished down the staircase. With Duroh's weapons alertly
on me, I bent over the crumpled Dr. Livingston. He was dead, beyond
question. For years he had been my best, almost my only, friend. There
was a lump in my throat as I went back to my seat at the table.

"About this Xalite," Duroh said pleasantly. "In what form do we
expect to find it? Pretty pure? Can you tell how pure it is with your
instruments? If it's in a pretty pure state, we won't need so much,
will we? Fifty pounds or so--to deal out to a panting world for all our
lifetime and make us rich enough for any man's dreams."

"So you all three have decided to be murderers?" I retorted. "One of us
I should have thought was enough--contaminating damn business--"

My bitter words brought a burst from Alan. "So what can I do?" he flung
at me; but still he did not look at me. "You think I want to live here
on this God-forsaken little world--and die maybe in a day? Or go back
to Earth? Dr. Livingston would have turned me over--you know he would--"

One crime with such ghastly fecundity begets another! Heaven knows
I could hardly blame the boy. He was only sixteen; pushed into
desperation.

"What will he do?" Duroh grinned. "Why, that's easy, isn't it,
Alan? He'll go back to earth--rich. When you're rich--you can bribe
officials. Or, at worst, you can't be hunted like a sewer rat as he was
before. Money buys hiding places, clothes and food. Easy to hide out,
when you've got the decimars."

"And me?" I persisted. "You need my help now? All right--let's say I'll
give it. And then what?"

"When we get back to earth we'll turn you loose," he smiled. "Why not?
You can hunt us all you like. We'll be gone."

Was that their plan for me? I doubted it a great deal. But I could see
no reason now to balk them. Certainly it was to my interest to find
the Xalite, get it aboard and start back. With Alan to help me--or
possibly even alone, for that matter--I could navigate back to earth.
The landing there, on one of the big flying fields, would be far less
difficult than here. Meanwhile, I would watch my chance. And get a word
alone with Alan if I could. I was still convinced that he wasn't the
same stripe as these other two cold-blooded villains.

       *       *       *       *       *

Duroh was questioning me now, and I answered him freely. A fairly
rich deposit of the Xalite should be somewhere near here where we had
landed. It would exist, probably as a strata in the metallic rock--not
recognizable perhaps with the naked eye, but identifiable with the
portable spectroscope.

"And with a pick and shovel we dig it out?" Duroh said. "You damn sure
better find it, Taine, if you know what's good for you."

"I will if I can," I agreed.

Carruthers came back. "Come on down and rig up this gadget, Taine. Then
we'll get on some heavy clothes and make a start."

Docilely I let them shove me down past our dim living quarters, into
the base storeroom. I saw now that Carruthers had a heat-gun clipped to
his belt with his knife. Alan apparently was unarmed. Dr. Livingston,
I knew, had brought some weapons. They were in his sleeping room--more
than these cut-throats had taken--but I had no way of getting to them
now.

In the base-room I rigged the small spectroscope, with its lenses,
prisms and batteries. Duroh brought us heavy trousers, boots, mackinaws
and heavy caps.

"Now," he said, "we're about ready, aren't we? If that air out there
is no good, we'll have to go through the midsection air-lock, with
air-helmets. That the idea, Taine?"

"That's it," I agreed. "And maybe with pressure suits, for all I know."

But none of that was necessary. Cautiously I admitted the air. It was
at once apparent that there was no great difference of pressure. It
came slowly hissing in, stopping our ears for a moment. It was cold and
dank, heavy to breathe and momentarily oppressive. But the feeling soon
passed.

"Very good," Carruthers said. "Open wide, Taine."

I swung the bull's-eye inward ... Zura. As my foot crunched into the
moist, wet snow, a pang shot through me. Perhaps I was the first living
thing ever to set foot upon an alien world. How different this landing
was from what I had anticipated! Dr. Livingston dead; myself a captive
in the hands of these cut-throats.

We had cut off the _Planeteer's_ interior gravity, and had found that
Zura was little different. As I walked now out into the raw, bleak
night, a sense of physical lightness was upon me. I was conscious that
if I took a leap it would be prodigious. Gravity perhaps was a quarter
less; but the difference certainly was no greater than that.

"We're leaving everything to you," Duroh growled at my elbow. "Make it
quick now, Taine, if you know what's good for you. All we want is a
supply of the Xalite, and get back and get away in a hurry."

Duroh and I were leading. He kept his little bullet-projector with
its muzzle rammed into my side. Behind us came Alan and Carruthers. I
carried the small electro-spectroscope, with its batteries slung across
my back.

"I have no idea which way to go," I said. "It's all a chance. Suppose
we go a little way; then stop and make a test."

"Suit yourself," Carruthers agreed from behind me. "We're cut off, down
here in this depression. Once we get up on the level, almost anywhere
should do for a start."

It was a weird, fantastic night-scene, as in a moment we emerged up
upon the lip of the little depression. Overhead the myriad stars
glittered in an inky, frosty sky. Around us spread the wild, tumbled
landscape. It was a queerly small area, viewed now from the surface
level. The convexity of the little world was instantly apparent, with
the horizon everywhere crowding close; the stars in the dark sky which
were low at the horizon seemed hanging there, as though one might make
a leap and seize them.

       *       *       *       *       *

We were hardly more than a hundred feet from the ragged little cliff
which towered now grimly over us. I flung a glance around. Everywhere
great boulders and ice-masses were strewn, wildly tumbled. The
starlight glittered prismatic on their tops. The shadows between them
were black, yawning pits of emptiness. Everywhere a frigid desolation.
But its congealed beauty was marred by the blight of warmth upon it.
Veils of ice hung from the ragged, honeycombed little cliff--but they
were leprous veils, their beauty eaten away by the blight of warmth,
like some hideous disease rotting them. Everywhere water was dripping,
running in rivulets, gathering into pools on which the starlight
shimmered with a faint opalescent sheen.

"Stop here," Carruthers commanded.

We had picked our tortuous, sloshing way perhaps halfway to the little
cliff. "Try the spectroscope here," Carruthers added. "Along the base
of that precipice. If there's an outcropping there, it would be easy to
get at."

His words struck me with apprehension. Carruthers seemed to know more
about this thing than I had hoped. It was my plan now to locate the
Xalite if I could. But somehow I feared to let them get their hands on
it. With it safely on board the _Planeteer_, it might easily occur to
them that they could successfully navigate back to earth. Their purpose
in keeping me alive would be ended.... I could not forget with what
cold-blooded nonchalance Carruthers had smiled at poor Dr. Livingston
and then stabbed the knife into his back. I was alert every second now.
If only I could get Duroh interested, with his weapon turned from me
just for a moment. With half a chance I would risk a fight now, rather
than cold-blooded murder later on.

"Now, let's hope--" Carruthers muttered, as I set up the little hooded
spectroscope screen, and trained the instrument on the base of the
cliff.

In a breathless moment the band spread out on the screen, glorious
little splash of colors, diffusing from one into the next, with the
thin dark lines of radiotronic emanations vertical streaks in the band.

Xalite! It was here, unmistakable. I glanced up from the hooded
screen. Off there, where starlight was glittering at the ragged base
of the little cliff, there was a narrow sword-slash of gray-white
rock streaking the rock-face. It was visible now, where ice probably
only recently had melted from it. Ore of Xalite! Dr. Livingston had
described to me what probably it would look like in its crude state
here on Zura. A hundred pounds of that ore would be enough for a
lifetime of earth's needs!

"Well," Duroh growled. "What do you see?"

I had been standing silent, peering at the cliff. Had something moved
off there? A sort of white shadow, quickly shifting. I had that
vague impression. And out of the tail of my eye, vaguely I noticed a
huge rock-cluster some ten feet from us. It was piled with fantastic
ice-formations, blue-white in the starlight. But it seemed that there
were white blobs there which had not been visible a moment ago.

"What's that screen show? Damn you, speak up." Annoyed at my silence,
Carruthers prodded me in the ribs with his weapon. "Looks like Xalite--"

"That rock off there," I murmured. "Carruthers, look--"

Whatever vague sort of warning I had intended to give came too late.
From beside us in the white, frosty starlight, weird white blobs
materialized. Men? Were they? I had a vague glimpse of little white
creatures, perhaps the height of my shoulder--white arms, legs, huge
round heads, shining bald, slate-gray in the starlight. A horde of them
in that second engulfed us.

The spectroscope went clattering as I fell, fighting, with half a dozen
of them on top of me. Gruesome little creatures. To my grip their flesh
was solid, sleek and cold.... I heard Alan give a startled cry, and
then a groan as he went down. Duroh's weapon cracked, with its weird
yellow-red stab of flame as the exploding powder in the old-fashioned
gun hurled its bullet. The lead slug must have found a mark. There was
an eerie, blood-chilling scream--inhuman, like some weird, unnamable
animal in its death-cry; and I was aware of one of the little creatures
leaping a dozen feet into the air and crashing down.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Duroh had no chance to fire again. The swarming, snarling little
things bore him down. And Carruthers was down. I had tumbled to my
back, with half a dozen of them on me. They were heavy; more solid
perhaps than an earthman. They seemed to have no weapons; their little
fists, small as a child's, were thudding at me like hard balls of ice.
Frantically I lunged, but the weight of them held me. A white, furry
garment seemed tied around their middle. One of the faces came down
above mine; weird face with eyes like slits, holes for nostrils and a
wide slit of mouth that jabbered at me with guttural, unintelligible
syllables.

"Don't fight," I heard Carruthers shouting. "Better give up--don't goad
them to kill us."

It seemed reasonable advice. They were jabbering like monkeys all
around us, but now they seemed more eager to make us stop fighting than
to harm us. I yielded suddenly, lying limp with their weight pressing
me.

"All right," I muttered. "Damn you--get off me."

They understood at least my sudden limpness, and in a moment climbed
away, and with a strength fully as great as my own, hauled me to my
feet. Carruthers and Duroh now were up, with the little white Zurians
gripping them. And I saw Alan, standing pallid and trembling, with
blood streaming from a gash in his forehead.

"Got us," Duroh muttered. "Gosh, look at them."

There seemed a hundred or more of the little white forms materializing
in the starry whiteness of the Zurian night. The protective coloration
of nature. They were hardly visible except when they moved. The group
that gripped us were fending off their crowding fellows now as they
milled forward, wildly jabbering, peering to see these four strange
beings which they had captured.

"Well, they don't seem to want to hurt us," I said. I peered down into
the face of the one who was at my side, his small white hands, with
long, thin fingers strong as little pincers, gripping my arm. "Take it
easy," I said. "Let's be friends."

I tried grinning at him. Perhaps he vaguely understood the grin. The
skin on his round white face was hairless, perhaps poreless, sleek as
gray-white, polished marble. But it wrinkled with his grimace. I saw
that he had no eyelids. The slits of the two sockets suddenly opened
wide, so that I could see his huge round white eyeballs, with a very
big purple-black lens in their center. It was a grotesque face, but
suddenly I realized that it was not unintelligent.

Then we were being shoved forward. For an instant the big Duroh,
towering head and shoulders over his little captors, made resistance.

"Don't be an idiot," I shouted at him. "Let them have their way."

The crowd milled around us as we were shoved along the base of the
cliff. I could see Alan, pale, silent, with his bloodstained face;
the grim, tight-lipped, pallid Carruthers; and Duroh, docile now.
And it occurred to me then, as I caught a look of frightened appeal
from Duroh, how different things may be, all in a moment or two. I
had been captive of Duroh and Carruthers and Alan, just a moment ago.
Murderous cut-throats, they would have dispatched me, no doubt, when I
had helped them all they needed. But now they looked to me as though we
four earthmen were allied here against this fantastic enemy. And it was
apparent that, like many bloodthirsty villains, Carruthers and Duroh
were terrified. Cowards at heart.

We were being separated in the crowd. "Take it easy," I shouted. "Don't
anger or frighten them--they'll kill us all." Certainly I had no wish
to have Duroh go into a wild panic, with the Zurians killing me as well
as the rest of us. We were all four unarmed now. They had searched
us. One or two of them were carrying Duroh's and Carruthers' weapons,
carrying them gingerly, awed and puzzled by them.

Where were they taking us? We came to an end of the little ice-cliff,
rounded it, and I saw a dark yawning hole, like a cave-entrance in
the honeycombed cliffside. The little white Zurians who were leading
us plunged into it. I was shoved forward more swiftly now, with the
darkness engulfing me--darkness filled with jabbering little voices and
the patter of their huge bare feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

It may have been that at first my eyes were not accustomed to the
greater darkness, and that presently, with expanding pupils, I began
to see. That, of course. But now I was aware of that sheen of light,
inherent to the rocks of this strange little world. A vaguely luminous,
opalescent sheen which grew in intensity as we advanced so that it
illumined the darkness with a weird, beautiful glitter.

I saw now that we were advancing into a widening tunnel. Already it was
some fifty feet wide, with lifting ceiling so that presently I could
only dimly see it, far up as it glistened in the opalescent light.
Moisture was up there--a myriad tiny drops, glittering like opalescent
gems in the eerie glow. Occasionally one would drop and hit my face.

Steadily the jabbering little crowd, with excited guttural voices,
pushed forward. I had the feeling at first that we were descending;
this winding, broadening tunnel going downward at an ever increasing
angle. Then presently it was as though the tunnel were level and as
we advanced, the whole little Zurian world seemed turning forward and
up over us. All in the viewpoint. Up or down; top or bottom--they are
meaningless terms except for comparison.

It was growing steadily colder now. The roof moisture seldom dropped.
Ice formations were everywhere here. There was a place where the roof
was suddenly much lower, so that I could see an intricate lacery of
ice-clusters up there, prismatic with glorious colors. Like stalagmites
here on the tunnel floor, the ice stood in great columns, crinkled,
glittering with a myriad facets of sparkling sheen. There were other
tunnels crossing us now. I tried to imagine how far we had gone.
Certainly a mile.

Then I was aware, as we rounded a curve, that ahead of us the shining
passage was opening up into some sort of apartment. The light-sheen
there was more intense. The crowd of Zurians had fallen silent now; and
as another passage crossed us at an angle, our immediate captors herded
most of their fellows away. Silently we advanced, with three Zurians
gripping each of us. It was as though now we were advancing into some
sacred place, so that our captors were suddenly respectfully silent.

"What the devil," Carruthers muttered, as I was shoved close to him.

We came out of the tunnel. I had a quick glimpse of a big blue-white
ice-grotto here--walls glittering with an opalescent sheen on hanging
veils of ice. And then I gasped; stared, numbed.

The Ice Maiden! The girl Alan and I had seen through the _Planeteer's_
telescope! At the end of the grotto, perhaps a hundred feet from us
now, on a small raised dais, she reclined on a pile of white furs. Her
head and shoulders were raised on one elbow, her graceful pink-white
limbs half revealed by the short white fur garment draped over her
loins and breasts. Her hair, blue-white as spun ice, fell in profusion
over her shoulders, framing her small oval face that was beautiful with
a perfection of earth-beauty!

Our captors were all intoning now: "Tara! Tara! Tara!"

Then as we were hurriedly shoved forward, the girl's arm went up with
an imperious gesture; and we were cast loose and flung at her feet!


                                  VI

Tara! Quite obviously that was the girl's name. The little Zurian
men were all intoning it with awed respect, as a gesture and a low,
guttural word from her made them seize us again, stand us erect in a
line before her. What weird, beautiful priestess was this? By what
incredible science could it be that she was fashioned like a beautiful
young earthgirl?

As we were stood upon our feet, with our captors at once withdrawing
to line themselves near us, I saw that at each of the several
door-openings which gave access to the grotto, other Zurians were
peering in at us. And guards were here--men somewhat taller, with wide,
powerful shoulders and smaller heads. Each of them held a long, pointed
shaft of ice in his hand for a weapon, with his motionless figure
tensed and his weird eyes alert upon us. Men who could with a single
thrust of their powerful leg muscles hurl themselves in a bound half
across the grotto.

For that moment we four stood silent, staring at the strange, beautiful
creature reclining on the dais before us. Young Alan was numbed,
blankly bewildered; Carruthers, seemingly less terrified now, gazed
with a grim smile playing on his thin lips; and on the handsome,
rough-hewn face of the giant Duroh, the panic of terror had gone. There
was a look there now of open admiration; a bold confidence, an eager,
predatory look.

Weird, transfixed tableau. It only lasted a brief moment, of course,
while Tara stared down at us, calmly, musingly--a gaze of quiet,
confident appraisement, her soft red lips gently curving into a
questing smile and her cold, pale-blue eyes roving us. And then she
spoke.

Amazing thing--it struck us numb, so that we could only stand and gasp.

"You look like earthmen," she said quietly. "Which is it, your
language?"

English words, quaintly intoned, but English! Her voice was soft, with
a queer limpid, liquid quality to it, in amazing contrast to the
guttural way she had spoken to her Zurians. And her tone, her look, her
gesture to us were quietly imperious.

"English!" Duroh gasped. "What luck! So you speak our language--well,
that's fine. Blast me for a sleeping tower time-keeper but you're
beautiful, whoever you are. Tell us."

"I am Tara," she said. The little smile that played on her lips was
amused now as her gaze roved the six-feet-four figure of Duroh.

"Tara? Tara what?" he demanded. "You're an Earthgirl of course. You
must be. Then how did you get here--"

It was dawning on me now; the only combination of possible
circumstances which logically it could be.

"You are the leader of your men?" Tara said quietly to Duroh.

"I--" Carruthers began. But a look from Duroh checked him--Duroh's look
of bold confidence that he could handle this girl.

"Yes, I am," Duroh said. "I brought them here, on an exploring
expedition from earth. We're not going to harm your little world. I
killed one of your men--what in the hell did they dare set upon us for?
See here now, what we want is--"

"You do talk rather too much," she interrupted. Her gaze left Duroh and
fastened on Alan. "You--the young one--what is your name?"

"Alan. Alan Grant," he stammered softly.

"You have a nice voice. You look like a nice young man. And you?"

"I'm James Carruthers," Carruthers said. "If you'll let me explain--"

"And you?" she gazed at me.

"John Taine," I said.

She sat up suddenly, with her shimmering hair tumbling in a white mass
over her breast. Again her calm, blue-eyed gad impersonally roved us.
"The big one lies," she stated. "Which one of you is leader here?"

"Our leader is dead," I burst out. "Murdered by these two--Carruthers
and Duroh."

"You're a liar!" Duroh gasped. He took a step toward me, but thought
better of it as the guard made a move forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carruthers started to speak, but Tara's calm voice silenced him. "So
even in your little expedition murder had to come." She seemed saying
it not to us, but to herself. "Of course, what would one expect? Who
was murdered?"

Her gaze was on me, and I told her what had happened and why we were
here. There was a brief pause, and again she silenced Duroh and
Carruthers.

"Zogg!" she called. "Zogg--come--"

From a glittering, blue-white vaulted doorway a figure approached--a
big Zurian nearly my own height. The shining, opalescent light gleamed
on his white bald pate. He looked a powerful fellow. A white fur-skin
draped him. In his hand was a club-like weapon, seemingly made of the
heavy slate-gray rock, sleekly polished to a knife-like edge.

"Zogg, take them," she said in her calm English.

"All of them, Tara?"

"No. All but this one." Her imperious gesture went to me. "With him I
will talk more."

Zogg's weird face twisted into a grin. A bluish tongue, like the
tongue of an animal, licked the pallid lips of his slit of mouth. That
the girl had taught him English was obvious. He had spoken to her
haltingly, mouthing the words with his guttural voice.

"Not--hurt them?" he demanded.

"No," she flashed. "Never will I have that here. Well do you know it."
Her cold-blue eyes glittered with her sudden angry emotion, and before
it, Zogg drew away. And then she burst at him in his own language.
I could guess that she was directing him what to do with the three
prisoners. Duroh tried again to speak but was silenced. A dozen of the
little side guards came pouncing forward.

"Easy," I warned. "Don't put up a fight, Duroh."

They were engulfed by the Zurians, shoved through the side archway, and
were gone.

"Sit here by me," Tara said calmly.

At her gesture I sat on the side of the dais, with her calm gaze upon
me as she questioned me. How shall I describe my first strange talk
with Tara? Under her questions I described frankly our expedition,
who we were, what we had come for, and what had happened. And then
suddenly I began questioning her. I had thought that her beautiful
cold-blue eyes would flash with the little lightnings as they had at
Zogg. But instead she said quietly,

"I shall tell you about myself, because there is no reason why I should
not."

I had guessed what at least the main circumstances of her history
must be.... The Blake expedition, which had left earth some sixteen
years ago and never returned, had landed here on Zura, when the little
asteroid previously had come into our Solar System. Landed here, with
its space-ship smashed in the landing.

"George Simpson was my father," Tara was saying. "Everyone is dead now,
of that little group, except me."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was myself only some four years old when the Blake expedition
disappeared. But I had heard of George Simpson. A fanatic. An altruist.
That was the best, undoubtedly, that you could call him. A crusader
for ideals, he had thought that he could remodel the world, remake
God's erring creatures so that hate and fear and jealousy and violence
would be gone. And among nations--peace, amity--never a hint of war or
aggression.

Nice ideals. Simpson undoubtedly was a genius. A remarkable orator; a
fellow of indefatigable energy; a personality forceful, winning. For
years, with fanatic fervor, he devoted his life to converting others
to his own ideals. It was ironic, but inevitable, that he himself was
always a storm-center. Pathetically sincere, frequently he became a
lawbreaker; was in prison and out again. Until at last he was the
frenzied hater of humanity--an outcast. And with a wild burst of
condemnation for earth and everything on it, he had joined Blake's
expedition, vowing he would never return.

"And you were on that expedition too?" I said. "And your mother--I
understood Blake took only a few men."

"He would not take my mother," Tara said. "So she hid herself on board.
I was born here--a few months after they landed."

The rest of the story was simple enough.

Her mother had died about a year after Tara was born. Her father had
brought her up, here on little Zura; had educated her. For fourteen
years, until his death a year or so ago, she had been his constant
companion. George Simpson was an educated man, a scholar. He had left
earth, determined never to return, so that he had taken many books with
him, with which Tara had been taught. And he had found here a strange,
primitive little people. There were, I believe, since it is understood
now that the Zurians were a dying race, no more than a few thousands,
living here in these interlacing honeycombed grottos. The forceful
Simpson, when he had learned their language, had come to rule them.
His intelligence, much greater than their own, and his own ideas which
seemed here, at least, possible of attainment, had enabled him to make
himself the Zurian ruler.

I must state now that it is far from my purpose--even if space
permitted, which it does not--to sketch the life-history of the
tragic little Zurian people. I am no ethnologist. Nor can I detail
the effect George Simpson had upon them--the practical working of
his ideal economic system. Books have been written on it in the last
half century, based on what Tara was able to tell the learned men who
questioned her. And as I indicated in my preface, much nonsense has
been written. I think that my own experience, with Tara there in Zura,
will demonstrate fully what I mean.

"And so now," I said, "since your father's death, you are ruler here?"

"Yes, of course. I followed my father's ideals."

"And there is no crime here? Nobody does anything wrong? They obey you?"

"I make them obey me," she said; and again her eyes flashed with the
little lightnings. "So I understand you came here to get what it is you
call Xalite?" she added suddenly.

"Yes."

"Something that belongs to us--to me--not to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

I withheld my smile. She was amazingly beautiful, reclining there so
close to me. Her bosom, the contour of it faintly apparent beneath
the white furry garment, rose and fell with her emotion. Her long
snow-white hair glistened with a silvery sheen in the opalescent light.

"You're very beautiful, Tara," I said abruptly. "Your strange white
hair--"

"My mother was like that. So you are a thief? My father would have
expected it of any man of earth."

I had touched her hand, where it rested on the fur rug beside me. "You
were taught to hate all earth-people, weren't you, Tara?"

"I hate thievery, and murder." Her beautiful moist red lips curved with
her scorn. "Five of you--just five to represent earth's millions--and
you are thieves and murderers. Everywhere on earth it is the same.
Oh, I _know_--my father, he told me. Oh, he tried so hard for what is
right--"

"I know he did, Tara. But he was doomed to fail."

"And your nations, too--thieves, murderers, just like you individuals."
She suddenly seemed to realize that my hand was on hers. As though a
viper had stung her she snatched her hand away. "You--Earthman! You
would dare to touch me! Thief! Murderer--like all your miserable kind!"

She was abruptly sitting erect, quivering with her anger as she spat
the words at me. I had drawn back. I was aware that from a nearby
door-oval one of the little white Zurian guards was coming forward,
but Tara imperiously waved him away. Her small white hand had gone
to her furry garment, came back, clutching a small knife of polished
stone. Little frozen volcano. But the tempestuous fires within her were
seething now. For that breathless instant I thought that she was about
to spring upon me with the knife.

"Tara--" I murmured.

Amazing little creature. Was it that subconsciously she realized the
irony of her violence, and was ashamed that I should see it? Her
hand opened and the knife fell to the rug at her side. Her flashing,
steel-blue gaze like a little sliding sword clashed with mine. Then she
called out an imperious command in the Zurian tongue. From the shadows
of the door-oval three guards came leaping at me.

"Tara--wait! Listen--"

Her furious commands drowned my protests. She was lying back, panting,
staring after me as the guards roughly dragged me away.


                                  VII

I was not killed, as momentarily I had feared, but was flung into a
cell. You might call it that--a small cave-like recess off one of the
smaller corridors. It seemed a level below the apartment in which Tara
had been. My captors flung me into it, shoved a heavy stone into the
door-slit, barred the stone with a metal fastening and withdrew.

More than ever now, the light inherent to the metallic rock-masses of
subterranean Zura was apparent--a soft luminous glow. Left alone, I
looked around me. It was somewhat warmer in here. The air was fresh
enough. I saw that it was seeping in through many little rifts, an
inch or two in width--tiny fissures in the honeycombed walls. There
was a couch here, of white skins. I threw myself on it with the sudden
realization that I was exhausted, and hungry and thirsty. The latter
two needs I could not supply--but presently I had drifted into sleep.

I was awakened by the realization that the door-slab was being drawn
aside. It was Zogg, Tara's guard who had taken Alan and the others
away. He came in with food and water--food that was a fatty, uncooked
animal flesh. I drank the water greedily--water different in taste
from anything I had had on earth, but it was palatable. The blubbery
animal-flesh at first was nauseous, but my hunger made me manage it. I
was stiff with chill, but the food warmed me.

"Thanks," I said.

Zogg had been standing by the door, watching me impassively. I added:
"Those friends of mine--what did you do with them? Kill them?"

"Near here. No hurt them," he said. Was that irony on his weird,
grimacing face? A string of little ornaments hung on his chest now,
dangling from his spindly neck. He gestured to them proudly. He was a
dignitary here--one of Tara's leaders, I surmised. Afterward I learned
that for years, in fact, he had been Simpson's lieutenant--forcing
Simpson's commands upon the primitive little people, with what
autocratic violence I could only guess. A belt of sinew was around his
waist, with crude weapons dangling from it.

His grimace widened. He swept me with a sidelong glance and again I
had the feeling that this Zurian was far more intelligent than his
weird, to me fantastic, aspect would suggest. His little slit eyes
stared at me with a queer sort of cunning, and his grimacing mouth more
than ever seemed ironical. It sent a vague shudder through me so that
involuntarily I tensed as he came suddenly toward me.

"Tara send me for you," he said. "She wants see you now."

Silently I preceded him through the doorway. He followed, guiding
me with his brief, guttural English words and with a knife-point
prodding my back. We traversed the dim, glowing little tunnel, mounting
steadily. I had expected we would emerge into the same apartment where
Tara had been before, but we did not. Abruptly the tunnel ended in a
huge glowing open space. The ceiling of this gigantic grotto must have
been five hundred feet or more overhead; only a bluish opalescent haze
was up there so that I had the feeling that I was outdoors. An ice and
rock wall rose to one side of me, through big openings of which I could
see the grotto apartment where I had met Tara a few hours ago.

And here, stretching before me in shining prismatic beauty, was her
garden--a smaller, vaulted grotto to my left, into which Zogg at once
led me. It was an amazing little place of glittering ice formations.
From its arching roof, ice hung in great sparkling clusters, like
stalactites, in places hanging down to meet the icy stalagmites of the
floor, so that there were vaulted little corridors and aisles between
them. In other places there were recesses shrouded with a white lacery
of frozen moisture--great bridal veils, blue-white, intricate with
nature's lacy patterns.

A little fairyland of ice. The opalescent sheen of the rocks sparkled
on it everywhere with a riot of pastel colors--a soft, prismatic,
breath-taking beauty.

"This way," Zogg said. "Tara waits you."

       *       *       *       *       *

She was in a small ice glade where furs had been spread, and in a
recess, half shrouded with frozen lacery, there was a stone bench
fashioned in earth-style. She was standing by the bench. Zogg pushed me
forward, and at her gesture, he withdrew. I caught a glimpse of his
face; his grimace--ironical.

"Tara--" I began.

"Sit down--John Taine." She waved me to the bench and dropped to the
pile of rugs. "You angered me," she said. "I am sorry about that. I am
thinking I will have to decide what to do with you--and those men with
you whom you say are murderers."

I could think of no answer. I could only sit staring at her beauty. The
lacery of ice-veils behind her seemed to glorify her with its prismatic
pastel glow.

"Tell me," she murmured, "of your earth-world. Is it now what my father
feared that always it would be?"

"Yes," I admitted. "I'm afraid it is." I began telling her of the
history of my lifetime. It is horrible, when you think of it,
how the events which humans create may be translated into terms
of lust and greed, and jealousy and hatred. And the motives of
nations--aggression--banditry.

"But it isn't all like that," I tried to explain. "There is love, too.
And friendship and self-sacrifice. And science to try and heal the
sick--to raise the standards of living. Xalite will do that. Xalite
which is apparently of no use to your people, Tara."

She was staring at me musingly. Heaven knows, looking back on it now,
I can try to understand her. Something within her, frightening her as
she talked here alone with me. The urge, hardly to be understood by
her, to order me here--to be alone with me. The first young man of her
own world whom she had ever seen. Emotions, frightening--mingling with
the life-long teachings of her fanatic father--his hatred of mankind,
so that now what she instinctively felt must have angered as well as
terrified her.

I had shifted from the bench to the rug beside her. My own emotions
were sweeping me. "Tara," I murmured impulsively, "I'm going back to
earth--and you're going with me."

I think she hardly heard me. She drew in her breath with a little hiss
at my touch and leaped to her feet. "I shall show you my people," she
said. "You will see what my father and I have done here."

She led me through the fairyland of the little garden; out through
an archway, so that again I seemed outdoors, with the ceiling of
this giant grotto high in the luminous haze overhead. And presently
we stood on a small rocky height, gazing down upon a primitive
little city. It was a brief glimpse--my only glimpse--of the Zurian
subterranean world. This group of habitations here--one of perhaps a
dozen scattered throughout the vast system beneath the wild surface of
the little asteroid--I saw as a scattered collection of white little
mound-dwellings. Stone and frozen moisture, modeled so that families
might have privacy. I saw the women there, with dangling hair and
breasts; and children, playing in the doorways of the huts.

It had been, before Tara's lifetime, a much more numerous people.
Perhaps once they had lived on the asteroid's surface. They were of
a different bodily structure from earth-humans--cold-blooded, in
comparison with ourselves. Then the Great Change had driven them in
here--and killed most of them, so that now, so far as Tara knew, only
these few thousand were left.

"The Great Change?" I said.

"It was when this world first came into the Solar System. My father has
explained it to me. It happened at about the time of my birth when this
world rounded the sun. Almost all of them died then. The heat was too
terrible to them."

       *       *       *       *       *

And that time was coming again! Zura now was heading to round the sun,
close, between the orbits of Mercury and Vulcan. Already, as I well
knew, the little asteroid was inside the orbit of Venus.... With the
protective blanket of heavy atmosphere, and the fires which doubtless
were at the core of the little world, Zura, even in the realms of outer
Interstellar space, had been habitable. But that protective atmospheric
blanket was not enough, inside the orbit of Mercury! The heat would
melt these ice-grottos. Already it was melting the outside surface.

"And you have no crime here?" I murmured. I could not avoid a faint
irony. "Nothing ever goes wrong? Everyone always does everything
exactly right?"

We were back in the prismatic little garden, walking down one of its
glowing blue-white aisles. She stopped and faced me.

"They would not dare do wrong," she said. Again her eyes were flashing.

"I see," I murmured. "But you have done well, Tara. You and your
father." And then, some damnable little imp within me made me add:
"On earth, Tara, our people sometimes resent that their rulers live
in palaces, when they can have only a hovel. That room where I met
you--and your gardens here--they're very beautiful--"

It stung her. I cursed myself for the words, almost as I said them. She
leaped to her feet, backed away, panting, in a tumult of hurt and anger.

"So all you can do is let me talk and then jibe at me! I--I hate you!
You and all your kind!"

"Oh, Tara--I'm sorry. I shouldn't have said that. Really, I'm sorry--"

"I hate you--"

The words died in her throat. Behind us, here in the glittering
garden, from Tara's apartments a group of Zurian women came running.
They were terrified, calling out to her in their guttural voices. Her
personal servants. And now, with them, a dozen or more of the little
guards appeared. They came from several directions, shouting for Tara;
confused, panic-stricken, wildly jabbering and gesticulating as they
gathered near us.

Tara's questioning glance crossed with mine. "Why--why, what--" she
stammered.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a turmoil everywhere here. Tara's servants and guards
gathering around her in terror. And now we could hear other sounds,
coming in through the huge archway from the open grotto-space outside.
Sounds floating up from the Zurian village down the declivity. A
distant blended murmur of angry voices. A mob down there, mounting the
slope, screaming defiance....

It was as though my words of a moment ago had been prophetic. Tara's
people had risen now into sudden murderous revolt!

"Why--why, what is this?" she gasped. Amazement swept her face as she
listened to the terrified words of one of her servants. And then her
beautiful face contorted with anger, her eyes were flashing as she
tossed up her head and squared her shoulders. "Why--why, how dare
they--"

She whirled suddenly and dashed through the garden, with me after her,
and the panic-stricken guards and servants gathering behind us. At
the big archway, where we emerged upon a little ledge-like eminence
with a ragged white slope down to the village spread below us, Tara
paused, stricken by the tumult of the scene. A mob of a thousand or
more, men, women and even children, were milling up the broken ascent.
A frenzied, menacing mob. Most of them carried crude weapons--shafts of
pointed ice, knives of polished stone; others primitive implements of
agriculture.

At Tara's appearance on the little height, a great shout went up. Those
in front, halfway up the slope now, momentarily paused, but the milling
throng behind shoved against them, screaming threats, waving their
weapons. A leaderless mob? And then I saw the tall figure of Zogg.
Not in the front ranks, but a little farther down. He was shoving,
shouting, inciting them forward. Then with a prodigious leap he was on
a boulder, screaming up at Tara, wildly waving at the milling crowd,
exhorting them forward.

The thought stabbed at me: Had the crafty Carruthers contrived this?
Working upon Zogg, showing him how he could raise himself into power
here in his little world by promising these people things which poor
Tara had not been able to give them? Had Carruthers, Duroh and Alan
contrived to be released? In that stricken moment I stared down at the
frenzied, milling throng, expecting perhaps to see them down there. But
I did not.

"Tara, good Lord--" I gasped.

An imperious sweep of her arm shoved me back. Then, with her little
figure drawn to its full height, she stepped to the brink of the ledge,
with her arms raised as she confronted the murderous mob!


                                 VIII

For that instant the imperious, angry figure of Tara checked the
climbing rabble. Their shouts rose higher, but as she grimly gestured,
the shouts died into a low muttering murmur. And then she began
speaking. For just a moment her imperious words in their own tongue
held them. Most of them had stopped milling now, staring up at her,
muttering sullenly. Her voice rose above it. Then from his rock, Zogg
was shouting and the mob caught it up, mutterings that rose again into
screams as the rear ranks again began shoving forward.

Poor little Tara. For an instant she tried to shout above the din. And
then suddenly she stopped, dropped her arms and on her face was the
pathos of disillusionment. Her father's ideals, bred in her, clattering
down now like a house of cards upon her.

The mob, frenzied again, was surging up the slope now. A thrown missile
came hurtling past us, a rock that crashed into a lacery of ice-veil
above us and brought it down upon us. Then other rocks, stones, a
variety of missiles showered us. Behind me I was aware that the
terrified servants and Tara's guards had fled.

"Tara," I gasped. "No use--"

I gripped her, trying to draw her away; and she stared at me with eyes
in which tears now were gathering. "Oh, John--"

"Come--run," I muttered. "You lead us--out to the upper surface--"

We started back into the garden....

"Here they are, damn them--"

It was Duroh's growling, triumphant voice! I whirled. He and Carruthers
were here in the garden glade, with Alan behind them. Near them were
two or three of the little white Zurian guards who evidently had
released them. They stood confused as Carruthers, snarling, whipped out
a heat-gun and leaped for me. Its sizzling violet bolt stabbed, missed
me as I leaped under it; and I struck him with my lowered head. We went
down, rolling, locked together in wild scrambling combat. Above us, as
we lunged and struggled with flailing fists, I could see that Duroh had
gestured at Alan to help Carruthers. He himself had leaped for Tara,
seized her as she fought like a little wildcat, with a knife in her
hand now, trying to stab him. Carruthers' gun had dropped from his hand
with my onslaught. He was a damnably agile fellow. He twisted on top of
me, his hands fumbling at my throat to strangle me.

The confused, terrified Zurians had decamped. I saw in that second
that Alan, unarmed, was standing numbed. Duroh thought he would leap
to finish me up, of course. But he did not. Suddenly Alan seemed to
realize that Duroh's huge arms were around Tara, his hand twisting the
knife from her, his leering, grinning face pressing down with a caress
upon hers.

And then Alan swiftly stooped, seized a blue-white ragged chunk of ice
at his feet, and leaped at Duroh. The huge ice-chunk crashed on Duroh's
head and he fell, with the raging little Alan upon him, crashing his
head again and again. But the knife in Duroh's hand was stabbing....

"Got you--" Carruthers leered. His hands throttled me. He did not
see what was going on above him as he sprawled down upon me while
momentarily I lay limp. But he didn't have me. My sudden unexpected
heave caught him off balance, broke his hold on my throat. And I
tumbled him off. The little heat-gun was lying here and I seized it.
Its bolt seared full into his face, shriveling, blackening the flesh
with a ghastly stench. He was dead in that second, with his face a
bubbling, pulpy mass of horror.

"John--he--he's stabbed--dying--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tara's voice called to me as I rose. Duroh, with his skull cracked,
was dead, and beside him Alan lay with Duroh's knife buried in his
chest, a ghastly crimson stain spreading over his shirt-front. His eyes
were open, glazing. They seemed to focus on me, and his lips, on which
bloody foam was gathering, twisted into a smile. Then he gasped faintly.

"I did something worthwhile--in my new world--didn't I? That's--good--I
guess I'm--glad--"

A gush of blood from his mouth choked him. Tara was down beside him,
her hand on his. He was trying to smile at her as the light went out of
his eyes and he died.

"Oh, John--"

I was aware that the shouts from the oncoming mob were much louder now.
Rocks were clattering into the arcade opening.

"Tara--we've got to--"

It seemed too late. In the opening three or four of the mob appeared,
brandishing their weapons. My gun spat its sizzling bolt. One of the
men screamed, leaped and fell. The others scattered as I ran forward.
On the ledge, with Tara behind me, I stared down at the advancing mob.
The first milling ranks of it were hardly more than fifty feet from the
top. My bolt hissed again; another man fell....

"John--oh, please--my people--" Tara's hand checked me. But I could
not be sure, if we tried to retreat, but that the frenzied throng
would be able to overtake us. Then with sudden thought I adjusted the
gun to a spreading heat-beam. The wave of heat leaped down--again and
again--heat diffused over a wide area, not intense enough to kill. But
before it the leaders of the Zurians staggered back, terrified, with
their hands before their faces. The mob behind them wavered. Down at
the bottom of the slope, others were pressing upward. In a moment it
was a milling, scrambling crowd with panic spreading. And then the
wavering ranks of it began rolling back until it was a rout....

"Tara, come--hurry--they'll be after us in a moment--"

       *       *       *       *       *

White-faced, with sorrow in her eyes mingled with wonderment, as though
still she could not believe this catastrophe, she nodded. She led me as
we ran, plunging down into the maze of tortuous corridors. Breathless,
panting, we ran; rested a moment in a dim, glowing passage--and ran
again.

"Oh, John--"

"Don't talk, Tara--keep going--"

It seemed that we could hear muffled shouts far behind us. But
presently we outdistanced them, and then at last, after an eternity, we
came safely out onto the upper surface.

It was night; glittering starlight on this doomed little world, heading
for the heat of our giant sun.

And there, quite near us, was the dark little globe of the _Planeteer_,
with the starlight glittering on its glassite dome-top.

"Wait, Tara--just a moment--" Unexpectedly, here on the sloshing
half-melted surface, I came upon the pickaxe, shovel and big canvas
bags, which Carruthers had dropped here when we were captured. The
sword-slash of gray Xalite ore was visible, a gleaming inlay in the
cliff-face nearby. I ran there. It chipped out readily under the axe
and then I shoveled it up, stuffed a hundred pounds or so of it into a
bag and staggered away.

The _Planeteer_. Never was anything so welcome as that lower little
door-oval. I tossed the bag into it. Barely in time. From over by the
cliff, the first of the pursuing Zurians were pouring out.

"Hurry! Get inside, Tara--I'll close the door--"

Mutely she obeyed. The oncoming Zurians were led by a huge figure.
Zogg. Grimly I leveled my gun, sizzled a bolt which struck him full,
crumpled him. It checked the others for a moment as I slammed the
_Planeteer's_ door and with Tara rushed up to its upper control turret.
The mechanisms hummed as they went into operation.

And then slowly, silently, we lifted. The Zurians were in a horde down
there around the _Planeteer_, milling and scrambling. A few of them
dropped off as we rose, up into the starlight with the strange little
world sliding away beneath us.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tell me more of what I will see on earth," Tara said.

The _Planeteer's_ journey was nearing its end. In the pale glittering
starlight, Tara and I sat in the control room, watching the approaching
earth, which was spread in a great crescent before us.

"You're too warm, Tara?"

"No, I'm getting used to it."

"The cold, on Zura--you never felt it?"

"I was born to that," she said. "My father, when I was a little girl,
he did everything to make me fitted for it. But I will like earth's
warmth."

Then again, as a hundred times before, I was telling her of earth--the
things that we were going to do there together. She was seated now on
a blanket on the floor-grid. Her knees were hunched up to her chin,
with her hands clasping them and her eager little face over her rounded
knees turned to me. Just an interested little earthgirl, making plans.

And presently I sat beside her on the blanket, with my arm around her,
and her head tilted so that her cheek was resting against my shoulder.
Then we fell silent as we stared out to the approaching crescent of
earth.

Good or bad--our world.





End of Project Gutenberg's Revolt in the Ice Kingdom, by Ray Cummings

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVOLT IN THE ICE KINGDOM ***

***** This file should be named 61810.txt or 61810.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/8/1/61810/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.